gh-134160: Improve multi-phase init note on isolation & subinterpreters (#134775)
python/cpython: Doc/c-api/module.rst

Extension modules created this way behave more like Python modules: the
initialization is split between the *creation phase*, when the module object
is created, and the *execution phase*, when it is populated.
The distinction is similar to the :py:meth:`~object.__new__` and
:py:meth:`~object.__init__` methods of classes.

Unlike modules created using single-phase initialization, these modules are not
singletons.
For example, if the :py:attr:`sys.modules` entry is removed and the module

> is re-imported, a new module object is created, and, typically, populated with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is re-imported, a new module object is created, and typically populated with
```

or; though I prefer the above

```suggestion
is re-imported, a new module object is created, and (typically) populated with
```

> fresh method and class objects.

Reviewer: exceptions are classes, but frequently referred to as types. Ambivalent on this one.
```suggestion
fresh method and type objects.
```

The old module is subject to normal garbage collection.
This mirrors the behavior of pure-Python modules.

> Additional module instances may also be created in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional module instances may be created in
```

:ref:`sub-interpreters <sub-interpreter-support>`
or after after Python runtime reinitialization
(:c:func:`Py_Finalize` and :c:func:`Py_Initialize`).
In these cases, sharing Python objects between module instances would likely
cause crashes or undefined behavior.

> To avoid such issues, multiple modules created from the same definition should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid such issues, each instance of an extension module should
```
or just 'multiple module objects', but this is trying to make it clearer that it's multiple objects as created by the import system &c, rather than anything controlled by the extension author.

> be *isolated*: changes to one should not affect the others,

Author: If we're dropping *created from the same definition*, this would start referring to *any* other module. Maybe this?
```suggestion
be *isolated*: changes to one instance should not implicitly affect the others,
```

Reviewer: Happy with this, thanks

and all state, including references to Python objects, should be specific to
a particular module instance.
See :ref:`isolating-extensions-howto` for more details and a practical guide.

> A simpler way to avoid the issues is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A simpler way to avoid these issues is
```

Extension modules created this way behave more like Python modules: the
initialization is split between the *creation phase*, when the module object
is created, and the *execution phase*, when it is populated.
The distinction is similar to the :py:meth:`~object.__new__` and

> :py:meth:`~object.__init__` methods of classes.

Reviewer: The links may distract here (no one should be reading this who doesn't know what `__new__` and `__init__` do!). No opposition to keeping, though.

Author: After I've seen some C library wrappers, I wouldn't count on that. Not everyone's coming here from the Python side :)

:attr:`~object.__dict__` or individual classes created with :c:func:`PyType_FromSpec`).

All modules created using multi-phase initialization are expected to support

> :ref:`sub-interpreters <sub-interpreter-support>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`sub-interpreters <sub-interpreter-support>`, or otherwise explicitly
signal a lack of support.
```

Typically, extensions ensure this in one of these ways:

- :ref:`isolating module instances <isolating-extensions-howto>`,

> - :ref:`raising an error on repeated initialization <isolating-extensions-optout>`, or

Reviewer 2: FWIW, I just noticed that the referenced section does not mention opting out by setting the `Py_mod_multiple_interpreters` slot to `Py_MOD_MULTIPLE_INTERPRETERS_NOT_SUPPORTED`.  (I didn't think to update the docs when I added that value.)  Fixing that doesn't need to be part of this PR, but it is relevant to this bullet (and the third bullet).

Author: (Please read this in a friendly voice; I can't find a way to reword this so it's clear and doesn't have a terrible sarcastic interpretation.)

Yeah. I'm not a good person to write that, as I never fully understood why a slot is better than explicitly raising an exception when you're about to clobber shared state.
It would be good to record that in the HOWTO, could you do it?

- limiting a module to the main interpreter using

>   :c:data:`Py_mod_multiple_interpreters`.

Reviewer 3: It's a bit weird to present this as a way of supporting sub-interpreters, no?

Author: Yeah. The original wording from PEP 489 would work a bit better:
```rst
All modules created using multi-phase initialization are expected to support
:ref:`sub-interpreters <sub-interpreter-support>` and multiple
:c:func:`Py_Initialize`/:c:func:`Py_Finalize` cycles correctly.
Typically, extensions ensure this in one of these ways:
```
or should we expand the “correctly“ to something like “work as expected or raise exceptions, rather than crash”?

Reviewer 3: I would definitely not call this "support". So perhaps something like:

```restructuredtext
Modules created using multi-phase initialization are expected to handle
sub-interpreters in either of the following two ways:

* either they fully support multiple interpreters by
  :ref:`isolating module instances <isolating-extensions-howto>`;
* or they signal that multiple interpreters are not supported by
  :ref:`raising an error on repeated initialization <isolating-extensions-optout>`
  and/or limiting a module to the main interpreter using
  :c:data:`Py_mod_multiple_interpreters`.

This way, users will not encounter crashes or undefined behavior when
trying to use these modules from multiple interpreters.
```

Author: I guess right thing would be to take step back and not make this so much about subinterpreters:
```rst
Multi-phase initialization allows creating multiple independent instances of the
module object.
Extensions are expected to handle this in one of the following ways:

* either by :ref:`isolating module instances <isolating-extensions-howto>`;
* and/or by :ref:`raising an error on repeated initialization <isolating-extensions-optout>`;
* and/or limiting a module to the main interpreter using
  :c:data:`Py_mod_multiple_interpreters`.

This way, users will not encounter crashes or undefined behavior when
trying to use these modules from :ref:`sub-interpreters <sub-interpreter-support>`.
The first two ways also prevent crashes when reusing the module after
Python runtime reinitialization (:c:func:`Py_Finalize` and :c:func:`Py_Initialize`)
and reimporting a module after it is removed from :py:attr:`sys.modules`.
```
Thanks for suggesting the effects on the users! It helps to make this less of a *thou shalt* commandment and more like something where you can consider the trade-offs.

Reviewer 3: This makes me wonder: why is there a third way if the second is better (and not more difficult to implement)?

Reviewer 2: Not that it is critical for this PR, but I've been thinking about something related that might at least a little insight: gh-132861.

Author: @pitrou: Let's say there's subtle nuance that doesn't really belong on this page of the docs :)
It would be good to explain it in the HOWTO, of course.

AFAIK, the main interpreter is special; sometimes, being loadable *once* but in *any* interpreter isn't enough.

Reviewer: The extant prior paragraph covers much of this, so here's an alternative:

```rst
When using per-module state, module instances should be :ref:`isolated
<isolating-extensions-howto>` to ensure that they are free of unwanted
side-effects. If the module still uses global state, or it otherwise has not
yet been isolated, either or both of of the following two options should be used:

* :ref:`raising an error on repeated initialization <isolating-extensions-optout>`
* limiting a module to the main interpreter using
  :c:data:`Py_mod_multiple_interpreters`.

This way, users will not encounter crashes or undefined behavior when
trying to use these modules from :ref:`sub-interpreters <sub-interpreter-support>`.
Ensuring a module is properly isolated or raising an explicit error also prevent
crashes when reusing the module after Python runtime reinitialization
(:c:func:`Py_Finalize` and :c:func:`Py_Initialize`) or reimporting a module after
it has been removed from :py:attr:`sys.modules`.
```

>   :c:data:`Py_mod_multiple_interpreters`.

Reviewer 2: Would it be worth pointing out that `Py_MOD_MULTIPLE_INTERPRETERS_SUPPORTED` is the default?  Probably not worth it.

Reviewer: We mention this slightly later on the same page: https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/module.html#c.Py_mod_multiple_interpreters
